And so finally, what I want to
talk to you about is D3 force.
So the D3 force layout is
a slight bit different from
what we had talked through
just now with the shapes and
hierarchies in that it's, one,
it directly mutates
the original data array.
And you'll see in a little bit why.
And also, that it requires upwards
of thousands of calculations
to arrive at its final position, instead
of just that one single calculation
that we saw with the shape in hierarchy.
But it's probably one of my
most favorite layout modules,
my favorite layout tool,
because of how powerful it is.
It's most traditionally used
to calculate positions for
a node and link graph, but
because of all of the different
functionality it has,
you can actually get quite creative
with how you apply the force layout.
So this is actually a very classic example
of a D3 force layout, and
the dataset is Les Mis,
and each of these are characters,
each of these nodes are characters in
the play or musical and school play.
And then each of the links
are the characters' co-occurrence
with each other, and
I believe after each chapter.
And I think they're colored by the family.
What you can see is that with the nodes,
the first layout asks for
an array of nodes.
And so this is with ID.
And these objects have just the ID,
which is their name, and
the group they belong to.
And optionally, the force layout asks for
an array of links.
And so in the array of links,
it says the source, and
that source ties directly back to
the ID attribute in the nodes.
And target similarly ties directly
back to the ID element and some value.
And so the way that we use
the force layout is we say,
this is the relevant piece of
code from that Les Mis example.
Which is that we create force
simulation and pass in our nodes,
and we say,
the first force that I want to apply.
Actually, I don't think
it matters as much,
the order for these forces.
And if it does matter,
I haven't quite noticed that big of
a difference in how to order them.
But certainly, if things are not
turning out the way you expect,
just try moving them around a little bit.
But to my knowledge,
from all of my experience,
I don't think the order of the forces
that you specify in this chain matters.
And I'm saying that take that with
a grain of salt, please [LAUGH].
But anyways,
we're saying that we want to first apply
a force of link and
we're passing our array of links.
And we're telling D3 that
in this array of links,
the way that it maps to our nodes is
through this ID attribute in our nodes.
And alternatively, if you pass in
an array of links that already
directly references the nodes,
then you don't have to specify this ID.
And you'll see that in our example below.
So then we can say we want to put
some charge in this particular force.
Charge is called forceManyBody.
The way that I think about
forceManyBody is you can either,
I think it defaults to
a negative 30 strength.
And so a negative value for
forceManyBody makes each of
the nodes repel from each other,
and if you specify a positive charge,
it attracts the nodes to each other.
So I think of forceManyBody
as like planets or
like stars or just like the universe.
And then I just think of
it like the planets, and
the closer they get to each other,
the more, I think, attracted they are,
and the farther apart they are,
the weaker the attractive force.
And that's how I think of forceManyBody
and how it's been implemented.
But for what we need,
you can just remember it as by default,
it's a negative charge that repels
nodes away from each other.
And then it has this force that just says,
we want each of our nodes to
be attracted to the center.
And this is only a subset of the forces
that are available with D3 force,
and you can see the rest of it
in the force module reference.
And you can actually also write your
own force, your own custom force.
So I think they detail how to do
that in the module reference also.
And finally, the most important part is
being able to update the node and
link positions on each tick.
So what does all of this mean, and
what is D3 doing underneath the hood?
So what it's doing is once it's
passed the array of nodes and links,
it first goes and assigns a random
x,y position to each of those nodes.
Then it loops through
each of the nodes and
applies the series of forces
that we specified up here.
There's three of them here.
You can have more or less.
And we apply the series of forces so
that with attractive forces, the nodes
pull together, pull towards each other.
So it actually kinda loops
through each node, and
it then loops through all of
the other nodes close by,
and then it applies the force
on that particular node.
And so the most common attractive
force is when nodes are linked.
And so that will make them get
positioned closer to each other,
nudged closer to each other.
Negative forces are those that push
the nodes apart to avoid overlap.
And so that's what I had mentioned
earlier with the negative charge.
Or there is another force called
collision that also helps with that.
And all of these forces are applied
to each individual node, and
nudges them, slightly nudges
the x,y positions slightly,
and it loops through each
of the nodes doing that.
And this series of calculations happen
in what D3 calls one tick and each tick.
And D3 underneath the hood runs
thousands of ticks until all of
the nodes are nudged to their quote,
unquote, optimal positions.
And there's some other
settings you can toggle and
play with with the force layout that
we won't really go into in here,
but will kind of help you get
closer to the quote, unquote,
optimal layout, and
that you can also read in the reference.
And finally, to use the calculated
node and link positions,
we update the corresponding DOM
elements either on each tick,
so we do that in .on tick, or
on the whole simulation ending and
we have that be a callback
function on .on end.
And so this is what I mentioned
earlier about the force
layout is a little bit different,
because not only does
it calculate the positions
thousands of times,
it also mutates
the original data directly.
Because it takes the original
data set you passed in,
and then on each tick, it mutates it,
and then on the next tick,
it uses that mutated one as reference and
then calculates new positions.
And then our next tick uses those
positions, calculates new positions, and
it kinda goes in that series of ticks.
And that's why it mutates
the data array directly.